[IMP] website: update header/footer page (#18591)
odoo/documentation: content/applications/websites/website/structure/header_footer.rst

Headers and footers
===================

The website header is the top section of a web page and typically includes elements such as the
logo, navigation :ref:`menu <website/header_footer/header-content>`, search bar, and sign-in or
:doc:`customer account <../../ecommerce/configuration/customer_accounts>` button. The footer is
displayed at the bottom of a web page and usually contains contact details, links, legal notices,

> and other useful information. Both can be customized according to your company’s needs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and other useful information. Both can be customized as needed.
```

The header includes company information, quick-access buttons, and :ref:`website menus
<website/header_footer/menu-editor>` to help users navigate the website effectively.
Well-structured, user-friendly headers and menus also play an important role in improving
:doc:`search engine rankings <seo>`.

.. _website/header_footer/menu-editor:

Menu editor
-----------

The menu editor allows you to edit the website header and add :ref:`menu items
<website/header_footer/menu-items>` and :ref:`mega menus <website/header_footer/mega-menus>`.

.. _website/header_footer/open-menu-editor:

To open the menu editor, go to :menuselection:`Website --> Site --> Menu Editor`. From there, you
can:

- **Rename** a menu item or change its URL using the :icon:`fa-pencil` :guilabel:`Edit Menu Item`
  icon.
- **Delete** a menu item using the :icon:`fa-trash` :guilabel:`Delete Menu Item` icon.
- **Move** a menu item by dragging and dropping it to the desired location in the menu.
- **Create a regular drop-down menu** by dragging and dropping the sub-menu items to the right,
  underneath their parent menu.

.. image:: header_footer/menu-editor.png
   :alt: Menu editor with sub-menus
   :scale: 70%

> .. note::

Reviewer: I'd make this a tip

   You can also access the menu editor from the website editor. To do so, either:

   - Select any menu item and click :guilabel:`Edit Menu`, or

     .. image:: header_footer/edit-menu-icon.png
        :alt: Access the menu editor while in Edit mode.

   - Navigate to the :guilabel:`Style` tab, and click :guilabel:`Edit Menu` next to the
     :guilabel:`Header` section title.

     .. image:: header_footer/edit-menu-button.png

>         :alt: Access the menu editor from the Style tab.

Reviewer: I'd remove this screenshot, I don't think we need it (whereas the first one does actually help as the option isn't as obvious/intuitive imo)

.. _website/header_footer/menu-items:

Add menu items
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

By default, pages are added to the menu as drop-down menu items when :doc:`they are created
<../structure/pages>`. To add a new menu item, follow these steps:

#. In the :ref:`menu editor <website/header_footer/open-menu-editor>`, click :guilabel:`Add Menu
   Item`.
#. In the pop-up window, enter the :guilabel:`Title` to be displayed in the menu.
#. In the :guilabel:`URL or Email` field, type `/` to search for an existing page on the website or

>    `#` to search for an existing custom anchor.

Reviewer: It seems we can type anything (i.e. a non-existing URL), and then we'll have the option to create the related page in the menu editor afterwards. If we don't create the page, the menu item will still exist but it'll link to a 404 page. I think we should maybe mention this ('m not sure how/where exactly though)

<img width="590" height="91" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/05af16cb-4cf0-4920-bd16-305271e1fab3" />

Author: You are right. I will add it right here as a tip or note

#. Adjust the :ref:`menu structure <website/header_footer/menu-editor>` if needed.
#. Click :guilabel:`Save`.

.. _website/header_footer/menu-item-design:

Menu item design
****************

To modify the menu items' design, click :guilabel:`Edit` in the upper-right corner and select the
header. Then, go to the :guilabel:`Style` tab and navigate to the :guilabel:`Navigation` section.
The following options are available:

- Adjust the :guilabel:`Desktop Menu` alignment for desktop devices.
- Adjust the :guilabel:`Mobile Menu` alignment and position for mobile devices.
- Choose whether :guilabel:`Sub Menus` open :guilabel:`On Hover` or :guilabel:`On Click`.
- Select a :guilabel:`Link Style` to highlight the current page in the menu.

.. note::
   The options available in the :guilabel:`Navigation` section may vary depending on the selected
   template.

.. _website/header_footer/hide-menu-item:

Hide a dynamic menu item for non-logged-in users
************************************************

To hide a :ref:`dynamic <website/pages/page_type>` menu item (i.e., a menu item generated
automatically by Odoo, for example, when installing an app or module, such as `Events`, `Courses`,

> etc.) for non-logged-in users, follow these steps:

Reviewer: Would these instructions work for static menu items as well? If so, I'd change the heading + this sentence:

```suggestion
Hide a menu item for non-logged-in users
****************************************

To hide a menu item for non-logged-in users, such as a :ref:`dynamic <website/pages/page_type>` menu item (i.e., a menu item generated
automatically by Odoo, for example, when installing an app or module, such as `Events`, `Courses`, etc.), follow these steps:
```

Author: The visibility of static pages (incl. menu item) is defined in the [page properties](https://www.odoo.com/documentation/19.0/applications/websites/website/structure/pages.html#page-properties). I could add add a see also for static pages though

Reviewer: Right, I forgot about that, thanks for reminding me! and yes a seealso would be nice I think :slightly_smiling_face:

#. :ref:`Enable developer mode <developer-mode>`.
#. Go to :menuselection:`Website --> Configuration --> Menus`.
#. Expand the list of menus for the relevant website if needed.
#. Select the menu item you wish to hide.
#. In the :guilabel:`Visible Groups` section, click :guilabel:`Add a line`.
#. Search for the group :guilabel:`Name` :guilabel:`Role / Portal`, and :guilabel:`Select` it.
#. Save.

.. tip::
   - You can further customize the menu items on this menu item form. For example:

     - Enable the :guilabel:`New Window` checkbox to open the page in a new tab when clicked.
     - Add a :guilabel:`Related Page` or :guilabel:`Related Model Page`.
     - Assign a :guilabel:`Parent Menu`, and/or :guilabel:`Child Menus` to create a hierarchy.

   - To hide the `Shop` menu item, :ref:`restrict e-commerce access to logged-in users

>      <ecommerce/customer_accounts/shop-access>`.

Reviewer: Should this be at the top of this sub-section actually, outside of the tip (since I feel it's probably the most common use case for wanting to hide a menu item?) and then add *non-logged-in-users* in the sentence since it'd be the first sentence of the section:

```suggestion
   - To hide the `Shop` menu item for non-logged in users, :ref:`restrict e-commerce access to logged-in users
     <ecommerce/customer_accounts/shop-access>`.
```
Then I would probably also rephrase your original first sentence to: *To hide other menu items to non-logged-in users, follow these steps*:

   Menu Item`.
#. In the pop-up window, enter the :guilabel:`Title` of the mega menu.
#. Click :guilabel:`Continue`.
#. Adjust the :ref:`menu structure <website/header_footer/menu-editor>` if needed.
#. Click :guilabel:`Save`.

Mega menu design
****************

To adapt the general layout of the mega menu, click :guilabel:`Edit` in the upper-right corner and
select the mega menu. Then, go to the :guilabel:`Style` tab and navigate to the :guilabel:`Mega
Menu` section. The following options are available:

- Choose a :guilabel:`Template`.
- Pick the :guilabel:`Size`: either :guilabel:`Full-Width` or :guilabel:`Narrow`.
- Toggle :ref:`eCommerce Categories <ecommerce/categories_variants/categories>` if applicable.

Mega menus are built using :doc:`building blocks <../web_design/building_blocks>`, which means each
component can be customized individually. For example:

- Edit the text directly within the building block.
- Edit a menu item's URL by selecting the mega menu item and clicking the :guilabel:`Edit` button in
  the small preview pop-up window. Type `/` to search for a page on a website, or `#` to search for

>   an existing custom anchor.

Reviewer: I think this is also valid for "regular" menu items and mabe we coud add a tip in the Menu editor section, maybe at the bottom of the Add menu items sub-section? Unless you have a better idea as to where to put it?

Author: Not sure if I understand correctly. Do you mean add this bullet point about menu items within mega menus under general menu items?

Reviewer: No I mean adding the part about editing a menu item's URL (clicking the edit button, typing / or #, etc. Does that answer your question?

Author: Ah indeed, I explained it under the menu item as well.

  .. image:: header_footer/mega-menu-option.png
     :alt: Edit a mega menu option.

- Move a menu item by dragging and dropping the related block to the desired position in the mega
  menu.

> - Delete a menu item by clicking the :icon:`fa-trash` :guilabel:`Remove` icon of the related block.

Reviewer: I know this is all technically "design" but I wonder if we should maybe move these lines to either the main Mega menus section (above this sub-section) or a dedicated section. My reasoning is: when you add a mega menu, its adds generic mega menu items, so it's not tailored to the website/db at all (and thus pretty useless). So to me an essential step after creating a mega menu is to edit the mega menu items (especially the titles + URLs + removing any unnecessary item), as opposed to adapting the general layout like you talk about on lines 148-154 is pure design and a bit more "optional", relatively speaking?

Author: I will rework it

- Set the :guilabel:`Content Width`.
- Add a :guilabel:`Border` to the footer and customize its size, style, and color.
- Adapt :guilabel:`Round corners` to fit the design.
- Add a :guilabel:`Shadow` and define its :guilabel:`Color`, :guilabel:`Offset`, :guilabel:`Blur`,
  and :guilabel:`Spread`.

.. tabs::

   .. tab:: Header-specific design options

      To further customize the website's header, use the following header-specific design options
      in the :guilabel:`Header` section:

      - Add a :guilabel:`Scroll Effect` to determine how the header behaves while scrolling the
        page.
        Hover over an effect to preview it.
      - Choose the :guilabel:`Header Position` for the selected page: :guilabel:`Regular`,
        :guilabel:`Hidden`, or :guilabel:`Over The Content`. When :guilabel:`Over The Content` is
        selected, you can also customize the :guilabel:`Background` and :guilabel:`Text Color`.

        .. tip::
           - To hide the header on all pages, go to the :guilabel:`Theme` tab of the website editor.
             Scroll down to the :guilabel:`Advanced` section and toggle :guilabel:`Show Header` off.

>            - :guilabel:`Hidden` elements, including the header, are available under :ref:`Invisible

Reviewer: ```suggestion
           - :guilabel:`Hidden` elements, including the header when applicable, are available under :ref:`Invisible
```

             Elements <website/visibility/invisible-elements>`.

      - Change the :guilabel:`Default` :guilabel:`Accent Color` to either the :guilabel:`Primary` or
        :guilabel:`Secondary` :ref:`color <website/themes/colors>` to add a subtle contrast to

>         drop-down buttons in the header.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        :guilabel:`Secondary` :ref:`color <website/themes/colors>` to visually distinguish
        drop-down buttons in the header.
```
and what do you mean exactly by dropdown buttons?

Author: It is about the color of drop-down buttons when hovering and click, it is highlighted. 

<img width="366" height="79" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/f571cd5a-4f07-4749-a291-2e9dbc15afcc" />

But I think your suggestion could match the meaning.

Reviewer: Ooooh, ok! thank you for clarifying! so it's only for buttons that have a dropdown, or does this apply to e.g., the contact us button as well? (i mean i understand primary and secondary button, it's just the dropdown part that confuses me, and if it's not relevant I think we could just remove that word?

Author: No, it only applies to drop-down buttons that's why explicitly mentioned it :/

Reviewer: That makes sense, I should've assumed as much, sorry! and thank you for bearing with me :slightly_smiling_face:

      - Define a :ref:`font <website/themes/fonts>`.
      - Set the :guilabel:`Format` size and add a color if needed.

      To control the visibility of specific elements, navigate to the :guilabel:`Show/Hide Elements`

>       section of the :guilabel:`Style` tab. You can show or hide:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      section of the :guilabel:`Style` tab and click the option related to the element you wish to show or hide. You can show or hide:
```
or something similar but I think it'd be useful to mention that we need to click the "option"?

      - :guilabel:`Visuals`, such as the :guilabel:`Company logo`, :guilabel:`Text Elements` (e.g.,
        a phone number), and :guilabel:`Social Links` for linking all social media accounts.
      - :guilabel:`Actions`, such as the :guilabel:`Search Bar`, the :ref:`Language Selector
        <translate/language-selector>`, the :guilabel:`Sign in` button, and the :guilabel:`Header
        Button` (a :guilabel:`Contact us` button by default).

>       - :ref:`Add to cart <ecommerce/checkout/cart-button-header>` and :ref:`Add to wishlist

Reviewer: What about adding up front (and spelled out --> the references you added do imply them but I think writing eCommerce, visibly would be beneficial) that these are ecommerce-specific elements (since they won't show if ecommerce isn't installed on the db):

```suggestion
      - :doc:`eCommerce <add link>`-specific elements: the :ref:`Add to cart <ecommerce/checkout/cart-button-header>` and :ref:`Add to wishlist
```

        <ecommerce/products/additional_features/wishlists>` buttons. You can enable a

>         :guilabel:`Background` for these navigation icons.

Reviewer: is the background applicable to all options or just the ecommerce-specific ones? If it's the first, I would move the last sentence to a new line (not as a list item)

Author: No, indeed, not just these, but, for example, it is also applicable to the search bar icon.

   .. tab:: Footer-specific design options

      To further customize the website's footer, use the following footer-specific design options
      in the :guilabel:`Footer` section:

      - Choose a :guilabel:`Slideout Effect`: :guilabel:`Regular` (i.e., no effect),
        :guilabel:`Slide Hover`, or :guilabel:`Shadow`.
      - Toggle the :guilabel:`Scroll Top Button` option to add a :icon:`fa-caret-up`
        :guilabel:`Scroll to Top` button, then choose its position.
      - Toggle the :guilabel:`Copyright` switch to hide or show the copyright notice. If enabled,
        add a color in the :guilabel:`Copyright` section if needed.
      - Hide or show the footer for the current page by toggling the :guilabel:`Page visibility`
        switch. Hidden elements, including the footer, are available under
        :ref:`Invisible Elements <website/visibility/invisible-elements>`.

> 

Reviewer: Should we also add in the footer tab that the footer is built using building blocks and its content can therefore be customized/edited in that way (kind of like you did for the mega menus, with the link and everything?)

Author: I added the tip on line 242 because you can add inner content snippets to both the header and the footer.

Reviewer: Ah yes, but I think I meant that maybe we should emphasize the fact the whole footer content (unlike the header which is built also using the menu editor) is solely built using building blocks? or do you think it's not necessary?

Author: Ah okay :) I wouldn't do that because the copyright note, for example, is not a building block, but a website editor feature. It might be confusing.

Reviewer: Agreed! thank you :)

     .. image:: header_footer/edit-menu-icon.png
        :alt: Access the menu editor while in Edit mode.

   - Navigate to the :guilabel:`Style` tab, and click :guilabel:`Edit Menu` next to the
     :guilabel:`Header` section title.

.. _website/header_footer/menu-items:

Add menu items
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

By default, pages are added to the menu as drop-down menu items when :doc:`they are created
<../structure/pages>`. To add a new menu item, follow these steps:

#. In the :ref:`menu editor <website/header_footer/open-menu-editor>`, click :guilabel:`Add Menu
   Item`.
#. In the pop-up window, enter the :guilabel:`Title` to be displayed in the menu.
#. In the :guilabel:`URL or Email` field, type `/` to search for an existing page on the website or
   `#` to search for an existing custom anchor.

   .. note::
      - To add a menu item for a page that does not exist yet, enter the new URL or anchor and click
        :guilabel:`Create Page` in the :guilabel:`Edit Menu` pop-up. If you add the menu item
        without creating the corresponding page, the link leads to a :ref:`404 error page
        <website/pages/URL-redirection>`.

>       - Menu items within :ref:`mega menus <website/header_footer/mega-menus>` can also be edited.

Reviewer: stupid question maybe, but should this list item really be here? It seems a bit odd here inside the instructions (and I don't understand the "link" 🙈 )

Author: You mean the one about the mega menu?

Reviewer: Yes, sorry!

Author: You are right. I will remove it.

#. Click :guilabel:`Continue`.
#. Adjust the :ref:`menu structure <website/header_footer/menu-editor>` if needed.
#. Click :guilabel:`Save`.

.. _website/header_footer/menu-item-design:

Menu item design
****************

To modify the menu items' design, click :guilabel:`Edit` in the upper-right corner and select the
header. Then, go to the :guilabel:`Style` tab and navigate to the :guilabel:`Navigation` section.
The following options are available:

- Adjust the :guilabel:`Desktop Menu` alignment for desktop devices.
- Adjust the :guilabel:`Mobile Menu` alignment and position for mobile devices.
- Choose whether :guilabel:`Sub Menus` open :guilabel:`On Hover` or :guilabel:`On Click`.
- Select a :guilabel:`Link Style` to highlight the current page in the menu.

.. note::
   The options available in the :guilabel:`Navigation` section may vary depending on the selected
   template.

.. _website/header_footer/hide-menu-item:

Hide a dynamic menu item for non-logged-in users
************************************************

To hide the `Shop` menu item for non-logged-in users, :ref:`restrict e-commerce access to logged-in
users <ecommerce/customer_accounts/shop-access>`.

> To hide other menu items of :ref:`dynamic <website/pages/page_type>` pages (i.e., a menu item

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To hide other menu items related to :ref:`dynamic <website/pages/page_type>` pages (i.e., a menu item
```
or:

```suggestion
To hide other :ref:`dynamic <website/pages/page_type>` menu items of  pages (i.e., menu items
```
(I prefer option 2 but i'll leave it up to you!)

generated automatically by Odoo, for example, when installing an app or module, such as `Events`,
`Courses`, etc.) to non-logged-in users, follow these steps:

#. :ref:`Enable developer mode <developer-mode>`.
#. Go to :menuselection:`Website --> Configuration --> Menus`.
#. Expand the list of menus for the relevant website if needed.
#. Select the menu item you wish to hide.
#. In the :guilabel:`Visible Groups` section, click :guilabel:`Add a line`.
#. Search for the group :guilabel:`Name` :guilabel:`Role / Portal`, and :guilabel:`Select` it.
#. Save.

.. tip::
   You can further customize the menu items on this menu item form. For example:

   - Enable the :guilabel:`New Window` checkbox to open the page in a new tab when clicked.
   - Add a :guilabel:`Related Page` or :guilabel:`Related Model Page`.
   - Assign a :guilabel:`Parent Menu`, and/or :guilabel:`Child Menus` to create a hierarchy.

.. seealso::

>    :ref:`Manage the visibility of static pages <website/pages/page_properties>`

Reviewer: yes! great addition, thank you!

.. _website/header_footer/mega-menus:

Mega menus
~~~~~~~~~~

Mega menus are similar to drop-down menus, but instead of displaying a simple list of sub-menus,
they show a panel divided into groups of navigation options. They are especially useful for websites
with large amounts of content or :doc:`e-commerce websites <../../ecommerce>`, as they can help
include all of the web pages or :ref:`e-commerce categories
<ecommerce/categories_variants/categories>` in the menu while keeping all menu items visible at
once.

.. image:: header_footer/mega-menu.png
   :alt: Mega menu in the navigation bar.

To create a mega menu, follow these steps:

#. In the :ref:`menu editor <website/header_footer/open-menu-editor>`, click :guilabel:`Add Mega
   Menu Item`.
#. In the pop-up window, enter the :guilabel:`Title` of the mega menu.
#. Click :guilabel:`Continue`.
#. Adjust the :ref:`menu structure <website/header_footer/menu-editor>` if needed.
#. Click :guilabel:`Save`.

Mega menus are built using default :doc:`building blocks <../web_design/building_blocks>`, which
means each component must be customized individually. To do so, click :guilabel:`Edit` in the

> upper-right corner and select the mega menu. Then:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
upper-right corner, then select the mega menu. Then:
```
(probably a nitpick though? 🙈 )

- Edit the text directly within the building block.
- Edit a :ref:`menu item's URL <website/header_footer/menu-items>` by selecting the mega menu item
  and clicking the :guilabel:`Edit` button.

  .. image:: header_footer/mega-menu-option.png
     :alt: Edit a mega menu option.

- Move a menu item by dragging and dropping the related block to the desired position in the mega
  menu.
- Delete a menu item by clicking the :icon:`fa-trash` (:guilabel:`Remove`) icon of the related
  block.

Mega menu design
****************

> To customize the general layout of the mega menu and individual :doc:`building blocks

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To customize the general layout of the mega menu and its individual :doc:`building blocks
```
